Ultralytics YOLOv8 Sparse-Transfer docs (#1656)
neuralmagic/sparseml: integrations/ultralytics-yolov8/tutorials/sparse-transfer-learning.md

<!--
Copyright (c) 2021 - present / Neuralmagic, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Sparse Transfer Learning

This page explains how to fine-tune a pre-sparsified YOLOv8 model with SparseML's CLI.

## Overview

> Sparse Transfer is quite similiar to the typical YOLOv8 training, where we fine-tune a checkpoint pretrained on COCO onto a smaller downstream dataset. However, with Sparse Transfer Learning, we simply start the fine-tuning process from a pre-sparsified YOLOv8 and maintain sparsity while the training process occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sparse Transfer is quite similar to the typical YOLOv8 training, where we fine-tune a checkpoint pre-trained on COCO onto a smaller downstream dataset. However, with Sparse Transfer Learning, we start the fine-tuning process from a pre-sparsified YOLOv8 and maintain sparsity during the training process.
```

SparseZoo contains pre-sparsified checkpoints of each YOLOv8 model. These models can be used as the starting checkpoint for the sparse transfer learning workflow.

[Check out the full list of pre-sparsified YOLOv8 models](https://sparsezoo.neuralmagic.com/?useCase=detection&architectures=yolov8&sort=null&datasets=coco)

## Installations

Install via `pip`:

```
pip install "sparseml[ultralytics]"
```

## Table of Contents

In this page, you will:

> - [Sparse Transfer Learn YOLOv8m onto COCO128](#sparse-transfer-learning-yolov8m-onto-coco128)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Sparse Transfer Learn YOLOv8m Onto COCO128](#sparse-transfer-learning-yolov8m-onto-coco128).
```

> - [Sparse Transfer Learn Other YOLOv8 Models](#sparse-transfer-learning-other-yolov8-models)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Sparse Transfer Learn Other YOLOv8 Models](#sparse-transfer-learning-other-yolov8-models).
```

> - [Sparse Transfer Learn with a Custom Dataset](#sparse-transfer-learning-with-a-custom-dataset)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Sparse Transfer Learn With a Custom Dataset](#sparse-transfer-learning-with-a-custom-dataset).
```

## SparseML CLI

> SparseML's CLI is built on top of YOLOv8's [`train` cli](https://docs.ultralytics.com/usage/cli/) script. This enables you to kick-off sparse training workflows with all of the friendly utilities from the Ultralytics repo like dataset loading and preprocessing, checkpoint saving, metric reporting, and logging handled for you. Appending the `--help` argument will provide a full list of options for training in SparseML:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SparseML's CLI is built on top of YOLOv8's [`train` cli](https://docs.ultralytics.com/usage/cli/) script. This enables you to kick off sparse training workflows with all of the friendly utilities from the Ultralytics repository like dataset loading and preprocessing, checkpoint saving, metric reporting, and logging handled for you. Appending the `--help` argument will provide a full list of options for training in SparseML:
```

```bash
sparseml.ultralytics.train --help
```

output:
```
usage: sparseml.yolov5.train [-h] [--model MODEL] [--data DATA] [--recipe RECIPE] [--recipe-args RECIPE_ARGS] [--batch BATCH_SIZE] [--epochs EPOCHS] [--imgsz IMGSZ]
                             [--resume] [--patience PAIENCE] [--save] [--cache] [--device [DEVICE]] [--workers WORKERS] [--project [PROJECT]]
                             ...
                            
```

SparseML inherits most arguments from the Ultralytics repository. [Check out the YOLOv8 documentation for usage](https://docs.ultralytics.com/usage/cli/).

> ## Sparse Transfer Learning YOLOv8m onto COCO128

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sparse Transfer Learning YOLOv8m Onto COCO128
```

> Let's try a step-by-step example of Sparse Transfer Learning YOLOv8m onto the COCO128 dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a step-by-step example of Sparse Transfer Learning YOLOv8m onto the COCO128 dataset.
```

> To run sparse transfer learning, we first need to create/select a sparsification recipe. For sparse transfer, we need a recipe that instructs SparseML to maintain sparsity during training and to quantize the model over the final epochs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run sparse transfer learning, you first need to create/select a sparsification recipe. For sparse transfer, you need a recipe that instructs SparseML to maintain sparsity during training and to quantize the model over the final epochs.
```

      model.18.m.0.cv2.act:
        output_activations:
          num_bits: 8
          symmetric: False
      model.18.m.1.cv1.conv:
        input_activations: null
      model.18.m.1.cv2.act:
        output_activations:
          num_bits: 8
          symmetric: False
      model.19.act:
        output_activations:
          num_bits: 8
          symmetric: False
      model.21.cv1.act:
        output_activations:
          num_bits: 8
          symmetric: false
      model.21.m.0.cv1.conv:
        input_activations: null
      model.21.m.0.cv2.act:
        output_activations:
          num_bits: 8
          symmetric: False
      model.21.m.1.cv1.conv:
        input_activations: null
      model.21.m.1.cv2.act:
        output_activations:
          num_bits: 8
          symmetric: False
      model.22.cv2.0.0.conv:
        input_activations: null
      model.22.cv3.0.0.conv:
        input_activations: null
```
</details>

The "Modifiers" encode how SparseML should modify the training process for Sparse Transfer Learning.
- `ConstantPruningModifier` tells SparseML to pin weights at 0 over all epochs, maintaining the sparsity structure of the network

> - `QuantizationModifier` tells SparseML to quantize the weights with quantization aware training over the last 5 epochs. The `scheme_overrides` are a bit complicated here to handle the GeLU activations followed by the C2f module introduced in YOLOv8, but you do not need to worry too much about this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `QuantizationModifier` tells SparseML to quantize the weights with quantization-aware training over the last 5 epochs. The `scheme_overrides` are a bit complicated here to handle the GeLU activations followed by the C2f module introduced in YOLOv8, but you do not need to worry too much about this.
```

SparseML parses the instructions declared in the recipe and modifies the YOLOv5 training loop accordingly before running the fine-tuning. 

Run the following to transfer learn from the 80% pruned YOLOv8m onto the COCO128 dataset:
```bash
sparseml.ultralytics.train \
  --model "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-m/pytorch/ultralytics/coco/pruned80-none" \
  --recipe "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-m/pytorch/ultralytics/voc/pruned80_quant-none" \
  --data "coco128.yaml" \
  --batch 2
```

> Lets discuss the key arguments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key arguments are:
```

> - `--model` specifies the starting checkpoint for the training process. Here, we passed a SparseZoo stub, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--model` specifies the starting checkpoint for the training process. Here, a SparseZoo stub is passed, which
```

identifies the 80% pruned YOLOv8m model in the SparseZoo trained on `coco` (which can be seen in the stub). The script downloads the PyTorch model to begin training. In addition to SparseZoo stubs, you can also pass a local path to a PyTorch checkpoint.

> - `--recipe` specifies the transfer learning recipe. In this case, we passed a SparseZoo stub, which instructs SparseML to download the premade YOLOv8m transfer learning recipe shown above. Note that the stub contains the `voc` term, indicating it was created to sparse transfer learn onto the VOC dataset. In addition to SparseZoo stubs, you can also pass a local path to a YAML recipe. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--recipe` specifies the transfer learning recipe. In this case, a SparseZoo stub is passed, which instructs SparseML to download the premade YOLOv8m transfer learning recipe shown above. Note that the stub contains the `voc` term, indicating it was created to sparse transfer learn onto the VOC dataset. In addition to SparseZoo stubs, you can also pass a local path to a YAML recipe. 
```

> - `--data` specifies the dataset configuration. Here, we specify the `coco128` dataset, which is automatically downloaded (it is built into YOLOv8). See below for an example using a custom dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--data` specifies the dataset configuration. Here, the `coco128` dataset is specified, which is automatically downloaded (it is built into YOLOv8). See below for an example using a custom dataset.
```

> As a result, sparsity is maintained while the training occurs and we quantize the model over the final few epochs. In the end, we have a 80% pruned and quantized YOLOv8m trained on VOC!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, sparsity is maintained while the training occurs, and you quantize the model over the final few epochs. In the end, you have an 80% pruned and quantized YOLOv8m trained on VOC!
```

  --save_dir yolov8-m
```

The resulting ONNX file is saved in your local directory.

## Sparse Transfer Learning Other YOLOv8 Models

Here are some sample transfer learning commands for other versions of YOLOv8. 

   - YOLOv8n Pruned-Quantized:
```bash
sparseml.ultralytics.train \
  --model "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-n/pytorch/ultralytics/coco/pruned49-none" \
  --recipe "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-n/pytorch/ultralytics/voc/pruned49_quant-none" \
  --data "coco128.yaml" \
  --batch 8
```
   - YOLOv8m Pruned-Quantized:
```bash
sparseml.ultralytics.train \
  --model "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-m/pytorch/ultralytics/coco/pruned80-none" \
  --recipe "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-m/pytorch/ultralytics/voc/pruned80_quant-none" \
  --data "coco128.yaml" \
  --batch 2
```
   - YOLOv8l Pruned-Quantized:
```bash
sparseml.ultralytics.train \
  --model "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-l/pytorch/ultralytics/coco/pruned85-none" \
  --recipe "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-l/pytorch/ultralytics/voc/pruned85_quant-none" \
  --data "coco128.yaml" \
  --batch 1
```

SparseZoo contains mutliple variants of each version of YOLOv8 at various levels of sparsity, which can be fine-tuned onto your dataset. 

> [Checkout the full list](https://sparsezoo.neuralmagic.com/?sort=null&useCase=detection&architectures=yolov8) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Check out the full list](https://sparsezoo.neuralmagic.com/?sort=null&useCase=detection&architectures=yolov8). 
```

> ## Sparse Transfer Learning with a Custom Dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sparse Transfer Learning With a Custom Dataset
```

> Because SparseML is integrated with YOLOv8, we can easily pass custom datasets to the training flows in the Ultralytics format. Check out the [Ultralytics documentation](https://docs.ultralytics.com/datasets/detect/) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because SparseML is integrated with YOLOv8, you can easily pass custom datasets to the training flows in the Ultralytics format. Check out the [Ultralytics documentation](https://docs.ultralytics.com/datasets/detect/) for more details.
```

### Ultralytics Dataset Format 

There are three steps to creating a custom dataset for YOLOv8.

#### 1. Create `dataset.yaml`

Ultralytics uses a YAML file to pass a dataset configuration that defines:
- The dataset root directory `path` and relative paths to `train` / `val` / `test` image directories (or *.txt files with image paths)
- A class names dictionary

Here is an example for [COCO128](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ultralytics/coco128),

> an example small tutorial dataset composed of the first 128 images in COCO train2017. These same 128 images are used for both training and validation to verify our training pipeline is capable of overfitting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a small tutorial dataset composed of the first 128 images in COCO train2017. These same 128 images are used for both training and validation to verify our training pipeline is capable of overfitting.
```

names:
  0: person
  1: bicycle
  2: car
  ...
  77: teddy bear
  78: hair drier
  79: toothbrush
```

#### 2. Create Labels

After using a tool like [Roboflow Annotate](https://roboflow.com/annotate?ref=ultralytics) to label your data, export your labels to the YOLO Format, with one
`*.txt` file per image (if no objects are in the image, no `*.txt` file is required).

The `*.txt` file specifications are:
- One row per object
- Each row is `class x_center y_center width height` format.
- Box coordinates must be in normalized xywh format (from 0 - 1). If your boxes are in pixels, divide `x_center` and `width` by image width, and `y_center` and `height` by image height.
- Class numbers are zero-indexed (start from 0).

#### 3. Organize Directories 

Organize your train and val images and labels according to the example below. For the demo COCO128 file above,  assumes `/coco128` is inside a `/datasets` directory in your current directory. YOLOv5 locates labels automatically for each image by replacing the last instance of `/images/` in each image path with `/labels/`. For example:

```
./datasets/coco128/images/im0.jpg  # image
./datasets/coco128/labels/im0.txt  # label
```

> For more details, checkout the [custom dataset set tutorial](https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5/wiki/Train-Custom-Data) in the Ultralytics repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, check out the [custom dataset set tutorial](https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5/wiki/Train-Custom-Data) in the Ultralytics repository.
```

### Example

> Let's try a real example with an aerial dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a real example with an aerial dataset.
```

#### Download the Dataset

The dataset is hosted on Google Drive ([link to file](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1GWTv9s-H387X-6wxHf2lVllqEdIv2J7N/view?usp=share_link)).

Install `gdown` and download/unzip the dataset saving in a folder called `datasets`:
```
pip install --upgrade gdown
gdown 1GWTv9s-H387X-6wxHf2lVllqEdIv2J7N
tar -xvf aerial-dataset.tar.gz
mkdir datasets
mv aerial-dataset datasets/
```

> After unzipping, we can see the directory conforms to the Ultralytics format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After unzipping, observe that the directory conforms to the Ultralytics format:
```

0 0.349479 0.646296 0.018750 0.064815
0 0.461458 0.916204 0.037500 0.052778
```

Run the following to visualize the data:

```python
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import random, cv2
from PIL import Image

plt.figure(figsize=(15, 15), facecolor='white')

filename_image = f"aerial-dataset/train/images/00001_frame000000_original.jpg"
filename_label = filename_image.replace('images','labels').replace('jpg','txt')
data = pd.read_csv(filename_label, header=None, delimiter=' ', names=["class", "x_center", "y_center", "width", "height"])

print(filename_image)
print(filename_label)
im = cv2.imread(filename_image)
im_size = im.shape[:2]
for _, bbox in data.iterrows():

  cls, xc, yc, w, h = bbox
  xmin = xc - w/2
  ymin = yc - h/2
  xmax = xc + w/2
  ymax = yc + h/2

  xmin *= im_size[1]
  ymin *= im_size[0]
  xmax *= im_size[1]
  ymax *= im_size[0]

  start_point = (int(xmin), int(ymin))
  end_point = (int(xmax), int(ymax))
  color = (0, 255, 0)
  thickness = 2

  im = cv2.rectangle(im, start_point, end_point, color, thickness)

plt.axis("off")
plt.imshow(im)
```

![sample-image](images/aerial-data-example.png)

> #### Create a Config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create a Configuration
```

Save the following configuration file as `aerial-dataset.yaml` in a folder called `datasets`:

```yaml
# aerial-dataset.yaml
path: ./datasets/aerial-dataset
train:
  - train/images
val:
  - val/images

# Classes
nc: 1  # number of classes
names: ['object']
```

#### Run Transfer Learning

> With the config file setup and data downloaded, we can simply swap in the dataset configuration file in place of the `coco128.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the configuration file setup and data downloaded, you can simply swap in the dataset configuration file in place of the `coco128.yaml`.
```

> With the config file setup and data downloaded, we can simply swap in the dataset configuration file in place of the `coco128.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the config file setup and data downloaded, simply swap in the dataset configuration file in place of the `coco128.yaml`.
```

Your directory should look like the following:

```bash
|--datasets
    |--aerial-dataset.yaml
    |--aerial-dataset
        |--train
            |--images
            |--labels
        |--val
            |--images
            |--labels
```

Kick off the transfer learning:
```bash
sparseml.ultralytics.train \
  --model "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-m/pytorch/ultralytics/coco/pruned80-none" \
  --recipe "zoo:cv/detection/yolov8-m/pytorch/ultralytics/voc/pruned80_quant-none" \
  --data datasets/aerial-dataset.yaml \
  --recipe_args '{"num_epochs":15, "qat_start_epoch": 10, "observer_freeze_epoch": 12, "bn_freeze_epoch": 12}' \
  --batch 2
```

You will notice that we added a `--recipe_args` argument, which updates the transfer 
learning recipe to run for 15 epochs. While you can always create
a custom recipe file and pass a local file to script, the `--recipe_args` enables you
to modify on the fly.

Feel free to adjust the hyperparameters as needed!

The model achieves ~80% mAP@50.

## Wrapping Up

> Checkout [DeepSparse](https://github.com/neuralmagic/deepsparse) for more details on deploying your sparse models with GPU-class performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out [DeepSparse](https://github.com/neuralmagic/deepsparse) for more details on deploying your sparse models with GPU-class performance.
```
